The Old Truth in Costa Rica, by Lon Otto
I will tell you a true story. One time a perezoso, what you call a sloth, was caught on the forest floor. He had come down from the treetops to do his weekly business and was in the process of burying it when a jaguar came along and took advantage of the situation and ate him.
When the other perezosos learned of this calamity, alas all too common, they came together to speak well of the dead one and to see if anything could be done about the danger, which each of them faced once a week, the elders somewhat less frequently. Half awake, one of the mourners felt a tear swelling out of his eye and moved to brush it away, though by the time his claw reached his face, the tear had long since fallen. So he delicately scratched his nose and said to the others, "Perhaps we should abandon this practice that brings so many of us to grief."
After considering the suggestion for some time, another perezoso said, "But if we do not descend to the forest floor to do our business where we can bury it, our enemy the jaguar will smell it and know we are here."
The others pondered this and at length agreed that it was so, remembering that that was the explanation for the custom. But the one who had spoken first observed, "Our neighbors the monkeys let fly from the highest treetop, and they seem none the worse for it. If the jaguar cannot reach us, what does it matter that he knows we are here?"
"We are not monkeys," the second speaker declared, and all of them, even he who had spoken first, slowly nodded their heads.
"We have always followed this practice," a third said. "To do otherwise would not be typical of us."
The second one agreed, saying again, "We are not monkeys."
It was approaching night, the conversation having taken up the better part of a day. Out of the fragile light a fourth perezoso spike, the oldest and wisest of them, who had to descend to the forest floor on business no more than once every two or three weeks, but then required many hours to accomplish what was necessary. He said, "The truth is this. Dropped casually from the safety of our beloved branches, our shit would be merely shit. Hard and shapely as our patient nature makes it, it is still shit. But when we plant it in the ground where the jaguar walks, it becomes precious as jewels."
Dark fell. Somebody asked, "Why? Why does it?"
But he got no answer. Hours later, when all of them had drifted from half awake to half asleep, the old one spoke again, so softly nobody understood him; it sounded more like a snore. He said, "It just does. It just does."